
  







    
        













    



  








  
  
    






























    
        
    
    










    Skip to Content



    Stanford Medicine
    
        
            Stanford Medicine 25
            
                –
                Promoting the Culture of Bedside Medicine
            
        
    
    
    
        Site Nav
        
            
            Menu
        

    














    An Initiative of the Program for Bedside Medicine

    
        	
                    
                        See us on youtube
                        
                    
                
	
                    
                        See us on facebook
                        
                    
                
	
                    
                        See us on twitter
                        
                    
                


    

























    

        
            













        



    Stanford Medicine

        Explore Stanford Medicine


        	
                Health Care 
                
                
                    
                        	
                            Find a doctor

	Adult-care doctor
	Pediatrician or pediatric specialist
	Obstetrician
	Clinics & Services

	Adult care
	Pediatric care
	Obstetrics
	Clinical trials



                        
                            	Locations

	Stanford Health Care
	Stanford Children's Health
	Emergency Department
	Dial 911 in the event of a medical emergency


                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Health Care

                                Learn how we are healing patients through science & compassion 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Research 
                
                    
                        	Basic science departments
	Clinical science departments
	Institutes
	Research centers
	See full directory
	Research Resources

	Research administration
	Academic profiles
	Clinical trials
	Funding opportunities
	See all
	Professional Training

	Postdoctoral scholars
	Clinical research fellows



                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        Research News

                                        
                                        Neuroscientist Michelle Monje awarded MacArthur 'genius grant' 

                                    
                                
                            
                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Research

                                Learn how we are fueling innovation 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Education 
                
                    
                        	MD program
	PA Programs
	PhD programs
	Masters programs
	Continuing Medical Education
	Postdoctoral scholars
	Residencies & fellowships
	High School & Undergraduate Programs
	See all
	Education Resources

	Academic profiles
	School Administration
	Basic science departments
	Clinical science departments
	Alumni services
	Faculty resources
	Diversity programs
	Lane Library
	Student resources



                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        Education News

                                        
                                        Students from far and near begin medical studies at Stanford 

                                    
                                
                            
                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Education 

                                Learn how we empower tomorrow's leaders 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Give 
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Support Stanford Medicine

                            
                        

                        	Support teaching, research, and patient care.  

	Ways to give
	Why giving matters
	Make a gift online



                        
                            
                                Support Children's Health

                            
                        

                        
                            	Support Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford and child and maternal health 

	Ways to give
	How your gift helps
	Make an online gift


                        
                        
                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                About 
                
                    
                        	About us
	News
	Contacts
	Maps & directions
	Leadership
	Vision
	Diversity
	Global health
	Community engagement
	Events
	How you can help



                        
                            Stanford School of Medicine

                            Stanford Health Care

                            Stanford Children's Health

                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                
                
                Site Search
                
                    


    
    
        
  





  



  


  






  
     Close menu
    

  
  

                

            


    
    
        


    
    
        
  





  



  


  






  
     Close menu
    

  
  

    












    
    
        	
        The 25
        
        The 25
	Mastering Newborn Exams 
	Neonatal Neurologic Exam
	The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide 
	Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)
	Understanding Scleroderma


            









  
    
  





  
    More

    










    
        
    
    
    
    
    


    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Aortic Regurgitation Exam


	Ankle Brachial Index
	Ankle and Foot Exam


	Ascites & Venous Patterns
	Bedside Ultrasound
	Breast Exam
	Carpal Tunnel Exam


	Cardiac Second Sounds  
	Cerebellar Exam
	Deep Tendon Reflexes
	Dermatology: Acne vs. Rosacea
	Dermatology: Learning the Language
	Dermatology: Nevi (mole) Exam












                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                
                    
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Diastolic Murmurs Exam
	Fundoscopic Exam


	Gait Abnormalities  


	Hand Exam 


	Hip Region Exam


	Internal Capsule Stroke
	Involuntary Movements
	Knee Exam
	Liver Disease, Head to Foot
	Liver Exam


	Low Back Exam
	Lymph Node Exam
	Neck Veins & Wave Forms


	Newborn Jaundice












                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Parkinson's Exam

 
	Pelvic Exam


	Precordial Movements
	Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection
	Pupillary Responses
	Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure


	Rectal Exam
	Shoulder Exam
	Spleen Exam
	Tarsal Tunnel Exam


	Tongue Exam

 
	Thyroid Exam












                    
                
            

        

    

    








  


            
          

          
        
	
        Blog
        
        Blog
	ArchiveArchive
	20232023
	Promoting Inclusive Care at the Patient Bedside 
	Janet Tillman's Life as SP and GTA
	The Significance of Small Gestures at the Patient Bedside
	Balancing Technology and Human Connection in Patient Care 
	How the ‘Privilege of Physicianhood’ Inspires Best-Selling Author Abraham Verghese  
	Stanford Medicine 25’s Resources to Help Physicians Promote Skin Health
	Honoring Breast Cancer Awareness Month Through Physical Exam Knowledge



	20222022
	Through a Patient’s Eyes: Physicians Reflect on Personal Illness
	Physical Exams and Clinical Observations Related to Cardiovascular Health
	Combat Physician Burnout with the Joy of Bedside Medicine
	Physical Exam Techniques to Support and Promote Women’s Health
	How Physicians Go Above and Beyond to Promote Patient Healing 
	How to Address Monumental Patient Conversations
	The Importance of Cultural Competence in Bedside Medicine
	How Physicians Can Help Promote Early Detection of Prostate Cancer
	7th Time's a Charm: The 2022 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Communication Strategies to Help Physicians Lead Meaningful Patient Conversations
	Bringing Tidings of Comfort and Joy to the Patient Bedside 



	20212021
	Registration is Now Open for the 2021 Stanford Medicine 25 Skills Symposium 
	Medscape Article Highlights Need for Physical Exam Training & Assessment
	The Resurgence of Bedside Teaching During the Pandemic
	Teaching Empathy in Medical Education
	The Presence 5 for Racial Justice: Promoting Anti-Racism in Clinical Interactions
	Dr. Verghese’s Rules for the Bedside Exam
	Bringing Human Connection to the Forefront of Medicine in a Technological Era



	20202020
	Five Practices to Strengthen the Physician-Patient Relationship
	Telehealth Tips to Preserve Key Aspects of Patient Care 
	 
	 



	20192019
	How AI Can Improve the EHR and Bedside Medicine
	Bedside Teaching is a Powerful Learning Tool in the ICU
	Thoughtful Implementation of Machine Learning Can Help Physicians Improve Patient Care
	Register Now for the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Cultivating The “Golden Minute” at the Bedside
	Four Physicians Describe the Synergy Between Technology and Bedside Medicine 
	Artificial Intelligence and the Gift of Physician Time
	Compassion: A Powerful Tool for Improving Patient Outcomes
	The Physical Exam Remains an Effective Tool for Physicians
	The Art and Science of Patient Care
	Learning from the Bedside at the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium
	Physicians Can Protect the Human Connection in Medicine
	A Diagnosis of Nelson's Syndrome and Why You Won't See it Anymore
	Humanizing the EHR



	20182018
	What Stands in the Way of Bedside Teaching?
	An Emphasis on the Bedside May Prevent Physician Burnout
	The Spine Sign
	Artificial Intelligence as a Partner in Patient Care
	Physical Exam Can Sort Out - And Treat - Common Type of Vertigo
	Bedside Medicine Training Benefits New and Established Physicians
	Benefits of Bringing Doctors Back to the Bedside
	UMKC Case Highlights the Importance of Thorough Physical Exam
	Register Now for the 4th Annual Bedside Teaching Symposium
	Using Art to Teach the Human Side of Medicine
	Journal Dedicates Entire Issue to “Enduring Value” of Bedside Medicine
	The Basics vs. Technology Debate: When They Work Together Everyone Wins
	Abraham Verghese Shares Story of the EHR’s Negative Consequences With Broader Audience
	The 4th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium
	The Miracle of a Patient’s Recovery
	Compassion, Patience and Bedside Manner Improve Patient Satisfaction
	Technology Doesn’t Have to Be the Antithesis of Humanity
	AI to Complement – Not Compete With –Physicians’ Diagnostic Skills
	The Tradition of Daily Bedside Clinical Care
	How Technology May Lead to Greater Human Connection at the Bedside
	Finding Joy in Physical Exam Skills
	As Prices Drop, Point-of-Care Ultrasound May Spark Evolution of Physical Exam
	Empathy and the Physical Exam Remain Essential Components of Medicine
	Teaching the “Intangibles” of Medicine
	AI is Doing More to Help Keep Doctors at the Bedside
	Using Riddles as Medical Teaching Tools
	Medical Students Recognize Importance of Bedside Manner



	20172017
	Announcing the 2017 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Gingival Hyperplasia in Acute Leukemia
	Miliaria (Heat Rash) Types & Symptoms 
	Dr. Abraham Verghese Interviews Dr. Jerome Kassirer on New Book
	Signs of Scleroderma
	can-improv-help-doctors
	conversation-about-bedside-medicine-gains-momentum



	20162016
	What is amyopathic dermatomyositis?
	What is this Kussmaul’s sign?
	Abraham Verghese Asks: Why Are We Doing This Teaching?
	Referred Pain Physical Exam
	Will the Healing Touch Go Out the Door With the Stethoscope?
	Muscle Spasticity vs Rigidity 
	What is a roth spot?
	Stanford 25 Skills Symposium 2016 Announced!
	Every Patient Has a Story Worth Hearing
	What is the Howell-Jolly body?
	What will bedside manner look like for new data-driven physicians?
	What is Plummer-Vinson syndrome?
	What is the Sister Mary Joseph nodule?
	What is rhinophyma?
	What is the ugly duckling sign?
	Diagnose this skin lesion with newest Stanford 25 video and topic.
	What is the exam of calciphylaxis?
	Stanford Medicine 25 Launches New Website
	Medical Errors and Adverse Events from a Missed or Inadequate Physical Exam
	What is skin coining (Gua sha)?



	20152015
	Announcing the Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	The Jugular Venous Pulse – Circa 1957
	Guttate psoriasis Exam and Overview
	Thyroid Nodule Overview - The Thyroid Exam
	What Is The Specific Cause of This Patient’s Clubbing?
	Frank's Sign (Diagonal Earlobe Crease) |
	The Saddle Nose - Overview
	 Stanford Medicine 25 Skills Symposium 2015
	COMING OUT OF THE COLD
	Approach to Spinal Disease by Dr. Rick Hodes



	20132013
	Patient has this new skin finding, what should you worry about?
	Stanford 25: Approach to Tremor
	Congratulations to our ACP Winners!
	Happy Halloween! So this is the scariest picture we’ve got! What is it?
	An interesting illustration of the physical exam
	If you put your stethoscope over this, what will you hear?
	A patient presents with foot pain and these chronic findings?
	Stanford ENT Free Oral Screening November 2nd
	Your patient gets this rash, what’s the diagnosis?
	This patient presents with chest pain. What’s the diagnosis?
	Website Reaches Half a Million Visitors!
	A patient asks you… what is this?
	Can you diagnose the cause of the patient’s lymphedema?
	Can you guess the cause of the patient’s bleed?
	The History of Pulsus Paradoxus
	Understanding Pulsus Paradoxus
	Remember this finding???
	Learn how doctor’s should perform a bedside swallow evaluation!
	Using Google Glass to Examine the Hand with Dr. Verghese
	Welcome New Stanford Interns!!!!
	Teaching the teachers… Our methods.
	What is the Marcus Gunn Pupil?
	Abdominal Wall Pain
	Do you know what this is???
	This-Week’s-Stanford-25-Session
	Examination of the Trachea
	Split Fixed Second Heart Sound & Loud P2
	The History of the Reflex Hammer
	Dr. Andrew Elder Visiting Stanford
	Abraham-Verghese’s-TED-Talk:-Over-one-million-views!
	Stanford Medicine 25 Clinical Pearl Award
	11 Facts About Sir William Osler
	Know your tremor?
	Measuring Central Venous Pressure with the Arm



	20242024
	Healing: A Journey, Not a Destination
	Confusion & Unsteady Gait: This Physical Exam Tells You Why 
	Books On Bedside Medicine: Stanford Medicine 25’s Summer Reading List 
	Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Maja Artandi, MD
	Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Michelle Chiu, MD
	Five Tips to Enhance Patient Communication at the Bedside






	CategoriesCategories
	Cardiology
	Dermatology
	Endocrinology
	Extremities
	Gastroenterology/Hepatology
	Gynecology/Women's Health
	Hematology/oncology
	History
	Neurology
	News
	Ophthalmology
	Perspective
	Pulmonary
	Rheumatology
	Technology





            









  






            
          

          
        
	
        Video Gallery
        
        
        
	
        About
        
        About
	About Stanford 25
	Symposium
	Resident Education: Internist Physical Exams
	Body as Text: Teaching Physical Examination Skills | Stanford Medicine 25
	TedMed
	contactcontact
	contact





            









  
    
  





  
    More

    












    Visit the Stanford 25 blog




















    
        
    
    
    
    
    


    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















    
    
        
    


    











    
        
    
    





    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    







    
        










	
	
		
	
	



	

	Stanford Medicine 25 Blog


	

    
    
    
    
        
            
            
                









            
        
    
    
    

    








                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    








  


            
          

          
        
	
        The Stanford 25 Exams 
        
        The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Newborn Cardiac Examination 


            









  






            
          

          
        


    
    





  






  
    










    
    
        
    
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    The Breast Exam
	    
    

  
  
    It is important to learn the correct technique for the breast exam to better discriminate between benign and possible malignant lesions.  Common presenting complaints of breast disease are self-detected masses or breast pain.

  
  
 





                    
                
            

        

    

    

  













share

    
        
    


    
    
        
    


    
    
        
    


    
    
        
    













    
        
    
    
    
    
    


    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        










    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Introduction
	    
    

  
  
    Breast Exam

  
  
 














    The physical exam of the breast can be divided into three components: inspection, palpation and lymph node exam.

 

In performing the breast exam is important to keep in mind the following general points:

-       It is better not to wear gloves while palpating the breasts. Wearing gloves may reduce your ability to fully appreciate all the features of a lesion, especially the smallest ones

-       Remember to always wash your hands before and after performing the breast exam

-       It is advisable for male examiners to have a female chaperone assist during the examination

-       The worst moment to perform a breast exam is right before the beginning of the menstruation when the most common benign lesions are more painful and bigger, making it difficult to differentiate between them and a malignant mass

-       The best moment to perform a breast exam is right after the end of the menstruation, when benign lesions are smaller and less tender

-       It is important to educate the patients to distinguish between normal and abnormal findings on self-examination of the breast


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Breast quadrants



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  














 








    
    
        

            

            

            

            

            

             

             

             

            

            
                
             

            
                
             

            

            

              

            

                       

            
            
                
                
            

        
    













    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Inspection
	    
    

  
  
    Breast Exam

  
  
 














    During the inspection of the breasts observe for any asymmetric findings, especially:

-       Abnormalities in the overall shape of the breasts

-       Changes in skin color

-       Skin dimpling / retractions

-       Spontaneous nipple discharge 


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    






                
            

            
                
                    Image Credit



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












     

Patient Positioning

First inspect the breasts while the patient is sitting upright. Ask the patient to relax both upper extremities by gently placing her hands on the thighs.











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Inspection: correct patient positioning.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












     

Inspection Maneuvers



There are some maneuvers that can be used to tense the skin covering the breasts, making it easier to detect abnormalities, especially the presence of dimpling or retractions of the skin.

In the first maneuver, ask the patient to move both arms above the head and then hold this position for a few seconds while continuing the inspection.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Inspection: hands above the head.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  


















     

In the second maneuver, have the patient firmly pressing both hands against the hips. Again, continue to observe any abnormalities in the breasts that may become more evident with this maneuver.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Inspection: hands firmly pressed against the hips.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












     

Common Presentations: Mastitis vs Breast Abscess

Breast redness, tenderness and warmth, especially in a lactating woman with fever, may be signs of mastitis, a fairly common presentation.

It is important to differentiate mastitis from a breast abscess. Both conditions are usually seen in the postpartum period in lactating women and both represent an infection that develops behind a clogged mammary gland duct.

It may be very difficult to differentiate between a simple mastitis and an abscess by exam alone. In this case, bedside ultrasound could be very useful to localize a purulent collection and make a diagnosis of a breast abscess.

Breast warmth and redness are also associated with inflammatory breast carcinoma. In this case, however, the patient does not usually have a fever and the skin may have a classic appearance of peau d’orange (orange peel skin).


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    





















                
            

            
                
                    Inspection: mastitis vs breast abscess.   



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    









                
            

            
                
                    Inspection: Peau d’orange.   



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Palpation
	    
    

  
  
    Breast Exam

  
  
 














    Before starting the palpation of the breasts, it is important to ask the woman to indicate the exact location of any masses felt during self-examination.

When palpating the breasts, it is important to pay attention to the following features of any identified masses:

o   Shape: the most common benign lesions, like a cyst or a fibroadenoma, have very regular borders while cancerous nodules tend almost always to be irregular in shape

o   Consistency: a mass that feels rock hard or otherwise very firm is probably malignant, while a rubbery or elastic consistency is typical of a benign lesion

o   Relation to the skin: a lesion that is very fixed to skin is usually malignant

o   Changes over time: rapid changes of a lesion over weeks to months raise suspicion for cancer

o   Tenderness: cancerous nodules tend to be nontender, while benign lesions are often particularly tender. A mass that changes in tenderness during the menstrual cycle is most likely benign


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Palpation: critical features of a mass.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  


















     

Patient Positioning

Palpation of the breasts starts with the patient sitting upright on the examination table. This position is exactly the same as the one used during inspection. Both hands lie relaxed on the patient’s lap.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Palpation: patient seated upright.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  


















     

Then ask the patient to lie supine on the examination table with both hands behind the head and repeat the palpation on both sides. This position allows the examiner to press any lesions against the chest wall making it easier to detect abnormalities that may have gone unnoticed in the upright position. For the same reason, it also facilitates the exam of the nipple area for both nodules and discharges.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Palpation: patient supine.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  


















     

Palpation Technique



It is important to keep in mind the following points about the correct palpation technique:

-       Palpation is best done by using the finger pads rather than the fingertips

-       One hand palpates the breast for any abnormalities while the other one sustains and stabilizes the breast

-       It is important to thoroughly and systematically palpate all the areas of the breast, including the tail of spence in the upper outer quadrant

-       There are different ways to move across the breast. Some clinicians prefer to move in circles starting from the nipple and going towards the periphery. Others prefer to move following imaginary lines that divide the breast in wedges, always from the nipple outwards. However, the most effective strategy based on available evidence is the “lawnmower” method where the hand moves up and down, from one side to the other, describing vertical lines all across the breast

-       Remember to press the nipple against the chest wall to elicit any discharges if not spontaneously present

-       If tenderness is present on one side, always start the exam on the nontender side


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Palpation: different approaches.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Lymph Node Exam
	    
    

  
  
    Breast Exam

  
  
 














    It is important to conclude the breast exam with a thorough examination of the axillary lymph nodes to check for any metastatic lesions, when breast cancer is suspected.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












     

Correct Technique



With the patient sitting upright on the examination table support the arm on the examined side and ask the patient to fully relax the arm. In this way the skin of the axillary region will be completely relaxed making it easier to appreciate any enlarged lymph nodes. Also, the arm is held in slight abduction at an angle of approximately 45° degrees.











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Lymph node exam: correct technique.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        











    











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  


















     

At this point palpate the axilla with your free hand using the tips of your 2nd, 3rd and 4th fingers.

Remember to check the supraclavicular and infraclavicular lymph nodes, too, which may be sites of spreading for breast cancer, even if less commonly than the axillary nodes. 











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















    
    
        
    


    




    








    
        
    
    





    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    







    
    
    
    
        
            
            
                

            
        
    
    
    
        
            
                
            

        

    

    
        








	



	
		
	
	
	



	Key Learning Points


    

    
        Learn the breast exam aspects that include: 

	inspection
	palpation
	lymph node exam




 



        
    

    














    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Related to Breast Exam
	    
    

  
  
  
 














    	Hip Region Exam, Approach to
	Pelvic Exam
	Shoulder Exam












                    
                
            

        

    

    

  





















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    The Stanford Medicine 25
	    
    

  
  
  
 


	Mastering Newborn Exams 
	The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Aortic Regurgitation Exam
	Ankle Brachial Index
	Ankle and Foot Exam
	Ascites & Venous Patterns
	Bedside Ultrasound
	Breast Exam
	Cardiac Second Sounds
	Carpal Tunnel Exam
	Cerebellar Exam
	Deep Tendon Reflexes
	Dermatology Exam: Acne vs. Rosacea
	Dermatology Exam: Learning the Language
	Dermatology Exam: Nevi (Mole) Exam
	Fundoscopic Exam (Ophthalmoscopy)
	Gait Abnormalities
	Hand Exam
	Hip Region Exam
	Internal Capsule Stroke
	Involuntary Movements and Tremor Diagnosis: Types, Causes, and Examples
	Knee Exam
	Liver Exam
	Low Back Exam
	Lymph Node Exam
	Neck Vein Exam
	Newborn Jaundice Assessment 
	Pelvic Exam
	Precordial Movements in the Cardiac Exam
	Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection
	Pupillary Responses
	Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure Measurement Techniques
	Rectal Exam
	Spleen Exam
	Tarsal Tunnel Exam
	Thyroid Exam
	Tongue Exam
	Liver Disease, Head to Foot
	Visit the 25
	Shoulder Exam Tutorial
	Parkinson's Disease Exam
	Diastolic Murmurs Exam
	Dermatology Exam: Nevi (Mole) Exam
	Modified Sarnat Exam for Neonatal Encephalopathy
	Neonatal Neurologic Exam
	Rapid Assessment of a Newborn
	Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide 
	Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)
	Understanding Scleroderma








                    
                
            

        

    

    








  









  











    
    
        
















    
    Stanford Medicine 25

        
            
                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    Learn more about Stanford 25.

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    The 25

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Video Gallery

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Annual Symposium

                
            

            
                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    Blog

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Recent Posts

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Archive

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Categories

                
            

        

        
            Stanford School of Medicine

            
            
            
                About

                Contact

                Maps & Directions

                Careers

            

            
                Basic Science Departments

                Clinical Science Departments

                Academic Programs

                Vision

            

        

    





            
        


        
             Find People
        

        
             Visit Stanford
        

        
             Search Clinical Trials
        

        
             Give a Gift
        


    

















    
        
            ©2025 Stanford University

            
            
                	
                        Privacy Policy
                    
	
                        Terms of Use
                    
	
                        Accessibility
                    
	
                        
                            See us on Facebook
                        
                    
	
                        
                            See us on X (Twitter)
                        
                    


            


        

    




    
    



  




  	
      Stanford University
    
	
      Stanford School of Medicine
    
	
      Stanford Health Care
    
	
      Stanford Children's Health
    
	
      Stanford Health Care Tri-Valley
    
	
      Stanford Medicine Partners
    





  

  









  


